#+TITLE: ONE LAPTOP PER CHILD DEPLOYMENT GUIDE 2011
#+AUTHOR: OLPC Foundation (c) 2011 One Laptop Per Child Association, Inc.
#+DATE: 2011-09-12

* One Laptop per Child

One Laptop per Child (OLPC) is a non-profit organization founded in 2005
with the goal of transforming education by providing every child with
access to a connected laptop computer, the XO laptop.  Connected laptops
provide a cost-effective way for states to create learning environments
that facilitate the greatest possible development of all children.  We are
driven by a firm belief that laptops have a unique ability to leverage
children’s innate curiosity and desire to learn, to develop critical
thinking skills, and to foster a life-long love of learning.

** OLPC Mission

To create educational opportunities for all by providing each child with a
rugged, low-cost, low-power, connected laptop with content and software
designed for collaborative, joyful, self-empowered learning.

** Five core principles

- Child ownership :: Access to information and activities at all times
     create a portable learning and teaching environment.  Child ownership
     includes protecting, caring for, and sharing this creative
     environment.

- Low ages :: The XO is designed for the use of children ages 4 to 12,
              covering the years of elementary school.

- Saturation :: In order to achieve meaningful educational improvement each
                child should own a laptop so no one is left out: digital
                saturation implies whole communities to become a part of
                the program.

- Connection :: XOs not only connect to the internet but to other XOs as
                well, providing an “expanded school” that grows beyond the
                walls of the classroom, enabling a dialogue among
                generations, nations and cultures.

- Free and Open Software :: As children grow and pursue new ideas, the
     software, content, resources and tools should be able to grow with
     them.  Children not only participate in activities and acquire
     knowledge; they can create activities and transfer knowledge too, and
     share it with the entire global community.

* OLPC Learning Strategy

“It’s an education project, not a laptop project”

OLPC’s principles are based on the learning theory of Constructionism,
which refers to the concept of “learning by doing”.  Seymour Papert, a
mathematician, computer scientist, and educator; developed the theory of
Constructionism built upon the work of renown Swiss psychologist of Jean
Piaget on Constructivism learning theories.

Papert explained that learning is most effective when the learner is
engaged in the construction of a meaningful product, and that technology
can become the tool for building knowledge.  He made the first and most
important efforts to provide children with control of new technologies.
Based on his research he suggests all children should learn to program the
computer, because this allows them to develop unique skills that empower
learners to learn about the way they learn.

OLPC’s philosophy is inspired by Papert and other progressive educators who
share his ideas about learning.  We believe the laptop is the agency to
engage children in constructing knowledge based upon their personal
interests.  The laptop provides children with tools for sharing and
critiquing these constructions which will lead them to become better
learners and teachers.  Therefore, OLPC does not focus on computer
literacy, as that is a by-product of the fluency children will gain
through use of the laptop for learning.

OLPC learning strategy focuses on building:

- Developing Digital Fluency.  This refers to computer programming skills
  and to the ability to build things of significance with technological
  tools.  “A technologically fluent person should be able to go from the
  germ of an intuitive idea to the implementation of a technological
  project (Papert & Resnick, 1995)”.

- Reflecting about learning, learning to learn and thinking about
  self-learning strategies.

- Building learning and innovation skills in alignment to with the 21st
  Century Skills:

  - Creativity and Innovation
  - Critical Thinking and Problem Solving
  - Communication and Collaboration

*Software : The Sugar Learning Platform*

In accordance with the learning theory of Constructionism and OLPC’s
principle of Open Software, Sugar provides the appropriate platform to
achieve OLPC’s learning strategies and mission.  With Sugar’s Activities,
children engage in exploring knowledge, in expressing themselves through
different media and in computer programming skills.  Sugar promotes
collaborative learning through Activities that encourage critical thinking,
collaboration, and reflection.

* Introduction to Deployment Guide

This document provides guidelines for program directors (government
officials, foundations, private funders, etc.)  conducting One Laptop per
Child deployments on a large scale to schools, cities, regions, or country
wide.

This guide outlines key considerations to be taken into account throughout
the different stages of a deployment.  It captures the knowledge and
expertise gained from deploying over 2 million laptops across more than 30
countries around the world.  Therefore, this document can be adapted for
each new deployment according to each country’s unique cultural, economical
and socio -- political context and in accordance with its particular
strengths and capabilities.

** Deployment Phases Overview

A deployment can be divided in three main phases: Planning Phase,
Deployment Phase, and Post- Deployment Phase.  This document is meant to
guide project managers through the roadmap towards a successful deployment,
by describing essential steps, and decisions to consider, and by suggesting
an action timeline.

[[file:images/1_deploy_phases_overview.jpg]]

* Project Implementation

An OLPC project has a direct impact on children and their learning
outcomes.  Other actors that are equally impacted by the project are the
school systems (especially teachers), families, and communities as a whole.
It is important to consider all of these actors when defining objectives
and implementation strategies.  Various domains must be included in such
strategies in order to ensure sustainability of the project.  The pyramid
below illustrates the hierarchy of these domains.

The base of the pyramid is infrastructure, which refers to providing access
not only to the laptop, but also to the electrical grid (or other
alternative power source), to the Internet, and to school servers.  Without
this base, movement towards the top of the pyramid will be very difficult
and will limit the outcomes expected to be achieved with the project.  The
top tier refers to two types of assessments.

Assessments of the first type measure the project’s impact, including
student learning and other objectives, such as social effect and school
improvement.  Assessments of the second type identify areas for improvement
of project implementation.  The elements of the pyramid are meant to be in
a constant cycle where the top always gives feedback to the rest of the
domains.

[[file:images/2_project_implementation.jpg]]

** Core Team

For successful implementation of the OLPC project, we highly recommended
deployments to recruit and build a local team with skills in: managerial,
logistics, technical, and educational fields.  The term we use to refer to
this team is the “Core Team”.  This team will serve as the interface
between the project and OLPC.

We advise hiring a project manager with experience in: project and budget
planning, external relations and communication.  This manager is expected
to plan and coordinate operations, as well as to supervise the different
departments involved in the project.  In addition to managerial skills it
is preferable that the potential manager has a background in technical
and/or educational fields.  The project manager should take on the
selection of the core team members he will manage.  The following
organizational chart for the Core Team is recommended:

[[file:images/3_core_team.jpg]]

For large deployments (>50,000 units) we consider a vital requirement to
comply with all members mentioned in the organizational chart.  Local
leaders should be hired as educational/learning and technical managers to
coordinate matters related to their area of expertise.  A logistics
coordinator should be in charge of laptop storage, inventory and spare
parts management.  For smaller deployments (<2,500 units) the logistics
manager’s tasks can be performed by the technical and/or the project
manager.

The following chart provides additional information on the responsibilities
and required skills of the Core Team members:

[[file:images/4_core_team_skills_1.jpg]]

[[file:images/5_core_team_skills_2.jpg]]

[[file:images/6_core_team_skills_3.jpg]]

* OLPC Support Strategy

One Laptop Per Child provides assistance throughout the different stages of
a deployment, focusing on three major types of support: Operational,
Educational, and Technical.

OLPC believes building local capacity in both educational and technical
fields is the key to self-sustained deployments and to the fostering of
local project ownership.  OLPC strategy entails pre-deployment training
of core team and ongoing remote post-deployment support (via email,
phone, or chats) dependent on the needs of the project.

OLPC provides free support to projects of any size.  For projects with
orders larger than 25,000 units, OLPC sends Educational and Technical
Support staff to the country of deployment for one week of comprehensive
technical and educational training.  This also applies to smaller orders
(5,000+ units) that have the potential for significant growth in a short
period of time.  For projects exceeding 50,000 units, the initial training
can be extended to two weeks with 2 additional week-long training sessions
within a 12 month period.

Follow-up visits to a country are on per request basis; additional
educational training can be provided 2- 3 times per year after the initial
training.  In-country training costs (excluding facilities and supplies)
are covered by OLPC, although sponsors typically provide suitable lodging
for OLPC staff.  In certain particularly challenging environments can OLPC
provide full-time in-country staff, including project managers, technical
directors and learning directors.  The costs of this level of OLPC service
are negotiated at the time of the request.

** OLPC Operations Support

OLPC offers direct support to funders and project managers during the
planning phase of deployment when strategic decisions related to financing,
legal agreements, and ordering processes need to be taken.  OLPC offers
ongoing support to the logistics department of core team in regards to
supply-chain management.

** OLPC Educational Development Support

Once a project is officially established, OLPC facilitates workshops for
core teams to develop an understanding of the XO as a learning tool.  OLPC
provides guidance in the process of defining a support structure for
schools or learning centers.  OLPC provides ongoing support throughout the
different teacher training phases of a deployment and for educational
content development.

** OLPC Technical Development Support

OLPC also focuses on building local capacity in technical aspects such as:
setting local infrastructure and connectivity; and all other
responsibilities regarding software, hardware, maintenance and repairs of
machines.

** Volunteers and Internship Programs

Another support strategy from OLPC entails Volunteer and Internship
programs.  During the months of June, July and August, OLPC launches
internship programs for students of recognized universities in different
countries.  The objective of the programs is for interns to work closely
with the core team and to provide support in different areas of the
projects depending on their backgrounds and areas of study.

* Planning Phase

The planning phase initiates with the idea of starting a project with One
Laptop Per Child and concludes once an order is placed with the
manufacturer.  OLPC provides assistance to sponsors in making the decisions
necessary during this phase, and in defining actions required in accordance
with the objectives of the program.  During the planning phase, sponsors
can get a better understanding of the elements involved in various stages
of deployment, including human, technical, and financial aspects.  The
elements included in the planning phase are: consideration of possible
financing approaches, a feasibility study, and a purchasing agreement
followed by an order for laptops.

[[file:images/7_planning_phases.jpg]]

** Financing Approaches

In considering a deployment with OLPC, project sponsors typically take one
of following three approaches:

*** Geographic Focus

With the geographic approach, a project sponsor selects a particular region
that is of interest to them.  Such region can be a country, state, city or
community.  A multi-city approach is not recommended as it leads to less
efficient use of infrastructure and administration, reducing the number of
children reached.  With the region selected, a project sponsor should be
able to determine the number of students, teachers and schools in that
region.  The number of schools with electricity and Internet connectivity
should also be determined.  With these five pieces of information, a
sponsor can use the feasibility model in the appendix to determine the
annual budget for the project and decide whether a phased approach is
necessary given possible budget constraints.

*** Budget Constraints

Many project sponsors come to OLPC with a country selected and a fixed
budget to support a project.  Within 2-4 hours working with OLPC, a sponsor
can determine the number of students that can be benefited by the project.
For this process to work efficiently, the following information is
required:

- Average number of students per school
- Average number of teachers per school
- % of schools with electrification
- % of schools with Internet connectivity

*** Political or social objectives

Some sponsors view an OLPC project as a means of achieving political or
social change.  For example, the government of Uruguay undertook their
project CEIBAL as a way of fostering social inclusion.  This approach does
not present a challenge for OLPC; in fact, it often leads to the
development of a project strategy far quicker than either of the other two
approaches.  With the use of the feasibility model and the four pieces of
information outlined in the Fixed Budget approach, any politically- or
socially- oriented project can be translated into a budget and the number
of laptops to be deployed.

** Key Assumptions

It is important for a sponsor to understand certain key assumptions about
the costs involved in carrying out a project:

- It is recommended that full-time staff with no other responsibilities
  manage a deployment. Ideally, a new company/foundation or government
  agency is formed to undertake the responsibility.  While such an approach
  may add to the cost, OLPC believes that the cost is more than offset by
  the improved effectiveness of management.  This approach also leads to a
  healthy separation of day-to-day management from politics in
  government-sponsored projects.

- Pedagogical staff is the key to a successful deployment, both initially
  and thereafter.  Consequently, the staffing budget provides for each
  school to be visited at least once a month after initial training to
  reinforce training and improve teacher skills.  Significant expenses are
  also incurred through network and connectivity management at the school
  level and through maintenance of the portals that serve students,
  parents, teachers and the community.

- It is recommended that a project has a call center to provide help desk
  and technical support to students, teachers and parents.  These centers
  also manage the repair process for inoperable units.  A budget for spare
  parts based on historical statistics is included in the model.  Necessity
  of repairs may vary depending on the student usage of the laptops.

- The cost of electricity and connectivity is highly dependent on the
  country of the deployment and service availability.  The model is
  designed to provide for solutions in any environment from no available
  services for electricity and connectivity to a full complement of
  services similar to the U.S.  and any alternative in between.  A detailed
  survey by school conducted by trained professionals improves the accuracy
  of the model greatly.  The most likely factor to be overlooked is the
  increase in electricity consumption at schools after the computers are
  delivered to the children.

- A significant additional cost for the computers may be import duties and
  taxes.  OLPC does not offer legal and tax advice and does not participate
  in schemes aimed at reducing or avoiding taxes and duties.  Determination
  of applicable expenses for such items is the responsibility of the
  sponsor.  OLPC does provide estimated costs for freight and insurance and
  typically quotes the laptop price as CIF.  Given that OLPC has much
  greater experience arranging ocean freight from China (through DHL) than
  most project sponsors, It is recommended that the sponsor allow OLPC to
  do it.  OLPC does not markup freight and insurance.

** Financial Assumptions

The following table offers a breakdown of the costs associated with
executing a project.  The first group of assumptions refers to
non-recurring costs such as hardware, shipping, and electrical setup (if
necessary).  The second group includes recurring costs such as monthly
operating costs and salaries for employees.

[[file:images/8_financial_assumptions.jpg]]

* Feasibility study

The feasibility study can provide data for enhanced decision-making and
budgeting purposes.  It is recommended that project sponsors perform this
study in order to have a better understanding of the target population and
local infrastructure.  After financing approaches and program objectives
have been delineated, other elements should be analyzed before moving on.
The school (or education center) selection process should be based on the
objectives of the program such as saturation based on grade levels,
saturation based on region or district, or saturation based on specialized
programs.  Having schools involved from the early stages can drive school
leaders to a positive response towards the program and can facilitate
project ownership at the school level.  A feasibility study should include:

- School surveys
- Power and connectivity status
- Allocation of laptops (warehouse and distribution process)
- Human resources (program implementation)

Once the schools are selected, a school survey should collect information
including the number of classrooms, students, teachers, and administrators.
It is important to keep in mind the accessibility of schools when planning
the distribution of laptops and spare parts, as well as when designing the
support and supervision structures of the program.  Moreover, an assessment
of power, infrastructure and connectivity at individual schools should be
made as part of the feasibility study.  The results of the assessment
should be used to revise plans in terms of timelines and costs, and to
mitigate any gaps in school readiness.  The assessment should include
availability of grid power (or alternative sources such as generators or
solar panels) and power capacity (in watts), availability of sockets within
each classroom, number of school servers needed, and internet availability
(DSL, VSAT, or GSM).

The following equation can be used to estimate the power requirements for
each school.  (The Watt- hours are dependent on how long the children are
in school, whether or not they are charging their batteries while they are
working, and how many hours per day the school server and connectivity are
operational.)

[[file:images/9_feasibility_study.jpg]]

The total energy required to operate 100 laptops and a school server over
an eight hour period is approximately 570 Watts times 8 hours, or 4560
Watt-hours.  If, for example, this energy was to be generated and stored
over the course of a two hour period, roughly 11,400 Watts of generating
capacity would be needed to feed a battery system with adequate storage
capacity, assuming 80% efficiency.

** Solar Panels

If the location of deployment is remote and isolated, and no electrical
power is available, solar panels can be an alternative solution.  Panels of
10 and 15 Watt solar-panel solutions are compatible with the XO.  The 10W
panel at full output will fully charge a drained battery in just under
three hours if the laptop is turned off.  If the laptop is running, then
full sun with the 10W panel will provide enough average power to run the
laptop and slowly charge the battery (in about six hours).

* Purchase Agreements and Ordering Process

This section describes the customary process prior to ordering laptops
which includes certain decisions about the technical features of the XO and
the related contractual agreements.

** Selecting your XO

The XO can be manufactured in various forms to best fit the local context
of the deployment.

*** Keyboards

XO laptops can be manufactured with a variety of language for keyboards.
In order for an XO keyboard to be available, a high-resolution image of the
layout must be accessible and existing XO software must support the
keyboard image.OLPC software releases are designed to support the
International XO keyboard option.

*** AC Adapters

There are two types of adaptors available brick or wall mount.  The XO AC
adapter has an input of 100- 240 volts and is available in 3 options:

- 2 flat prong (US)
- 2 round prong (EU)
- 3 flat prong (UK)

*** Memory

The XO uses solid state memory instead of a hard disk.  This is primarily
to improve its robustness but also to improve performance and reduce power
consumption.  The default memory type is 1GB of RAM and 4GB of Flash.
Depending on the budget and usage requirements, selection of faster or
bigger solid state memory for the XO can improve performance and storage
capacity.

*** Content and Custom Image

OLPC has developed a mechanism whereby the collection of “activities” and
content “bundles” loaded onto the laptop can be readily pre-configured.  It
is also reasonably easy to reconfigure the XO in the field.  It is the
responsibility of the core team to determine which activities beyond the
default set distributed by OLPC should be included on the laptop.
Everything provided on the XO, including texts, dictionaries,
documentation, etc., can be localized.  Electronic books—in formats such as
PDF, DOC, HTML—and other media can be pre-loaded onto the laptop as a
content bundle.  Please ask OLPC for suggestions as to potentially useful
materials and pre-loaded content preparation.

In addition, a deployment may choose to deploy computers with a custom
image.  A custom image is a selection of XO activities designed by a local
deployment team.  The option to load a custom image onto the XO at the time
of manufacturing depends on the level of skill and commitment from the
project’s technical and learning advisors.  There is also a minimum order
requirement for loading a custom image at the time of manufacturing.  A
custom image requires testing and maintenance.  OLPC provides projects with
the guidelines for this process; however, no technical support can be
provided for custom images as they are designed by core teams.  Sponsors
interested in XO custom images should consult with OLPC technical
personnel, who will assess the project’s suitability for this option.  If a
decision is reached to load a custom image at the time of manufacturing,
the final image must be presented to OLCP no later than 4 weeks prior to
the scheduled XO production.

Once the XO is physically customized for a particular country, it is ready
to be used.  However, due to the different curricula and language
variations of each country, it may be useful to select specific activities
to install on the XO as part of a “custom build” and also to review the
content available in the local language to determine if any work is
necessary to create translations or provide new content that is more
culturally relevant.  This could include the following:

- Pre-loading specific Sugar Activities to support specific curricula
  needs;

- Pre-loading specific activity content such as e-books;

- Browser bookmarks to country specific education websites;

- Maps;

- Providing language translations for Sugar and Activities loaded on the
  laptop (so that system messages, menus and buttons are in the local
  language);

- Providing language translations for Activity content (so that content
  within activities is in the local language, e.g.  e-books or place names
  on maps);

- Developing customized Sugar Activities to meet specific curriculum needs;
  and Developing custom content to meet specific curriculum or cultural
  needs.


The custom XO image option requires a certain level of skill and commitment
from the technical and learning deployment advisors.  OLPC will help with
the bundling process, but the responsibility for testing the bundle rests
with the in-country deployment teams.

** Purchase Agreement

OLPC recognizes a binding commitment from a sponsor to a project upon
receipt of a signed purchase agreement and a letter of credit in favor of
OLPC for 100% of the value of the laptops.  OLPC also accepts advance telex
transfers of cash in lieu of letters of credit.

The purchase agreement includes five major sections:

1. Detailed specifications of the laptop including the configuration of RAM
   and flash memory;

2. Number of laptops ordered and the price per laptop CIF;

3. Delivery schedule ;

4. Warranty terms and conditions; and

5. Standard legal sections such as governing law and dispute resolution.

For purchases of large quantities of XOs, OLPC will work on a contractual
agreement detailing the terms and conditions of the XO orders.  OLPC has a
contract template that can be modified in accordance with the deployment
requirements.  Issues addressed in the OLPC contract include payment terms,
warranty, letter of credit guidelines, and other topics pertaining to the
XO procurement process.  OLPC’s finance, supply chain, and logistics
personnel work closely to ensure the deadlines and conditions set forth in
the contractual agreement are adhered to.

*** Payment & Inco terms

The most common payment option for large-scale XO orders is 20% down
payment and 80% payable by transferable letter of credit.  The OLPC
template for issuing transferable letters of credit can be found in the
OLPC contract.  OLPC Finance personnel are committed to ensuring any
finance issues pertaining to an OLPC purchase are addressed quickly and
efficiently.  The Incoterm used for large quantity XO orders is CIF (cost,
insurance, and freight Incoterms 2010).  The CIF term means that the seller
(OLPC) is responsible for the shipment and insurance costs from the country
of origin to the port of destination.

The buyer of the shipment is responsible for all costs associated with the
shipment once the goods are delivered to the port of destination.  These
costs include customs entry and clearance, entry duties and taxes,
demurrage charges, landing charges at the importer's port, the unloading
onto trucks at the importer's port and the delivery to the final
destination.

*** Warranty

All XO orders are shipped with an additional 1% of units in lieu of a
conventional warranty program.  These units are shipped at no extra cost.
In addition to the supplemental units, OLPC provides a limited warranty in
the event of an epidemic failure.  Details on this warranty can be found in
the OLPC contract.

*** Local Duties and Taxes

The local duties and taxes associated with a shipment of XO laptops vary
depending on the rules and regulations of the local customs authority.
Import duties for laptops can be very high, and may reach20% of the
commercial value in some cases.  In order to avoid such taxes, OLPC
recommends that local teams research local processes for tax exemption and
seek such exemption whenever possible.

Receiving tax exemption on imported laptops for educational purposes may
require authorization from a number of local authorities; gaining such
authorization may take considerable planning.  Local customs authorities
should be consulted regarding the process and time frame of receiving a
recognized exemption.  OLPC is able to provide any documentation necessary
to process an exemption request with local authorities.

*** Spare Parts

XO spare parts can be purchased in conjunction with an initial XO order or
at a later date.  OLPC can assist the logistics department of team in
purchasing spare parts from the XO manufacturer.  Spare parts are available
in a range of minimum order quantities.  If spare parts are purchased with
an initial order, OLPC can recommend specific parts and quantities.

OLPC logistics staff based in Miami, FL track each order from receipt of
the letter of credit through the delivery of computers to the requested
port.  Weekly status reports can be provided to a project sponsor.  It is
the responsibility of local sponsors to clear units through local customs.
Local sponsors are also solely responsible for any and all duties, taxes,
fees and other costs related to freight forwarding services .
Additionally,local sponsors are responsible for all costs of transporting
computers from the dock to the warehouse.

** XO Order Process and Lead Time

In order to minimize the end cost, OLPC manufactures laptops to order and
does not maintain an inventory of laptops.  Formalizing the commitment to
purchase XO laptops assists OLPC in working with core team to establish a
deployment timeline that will lead to an efficient XO deployment
experience.

Upon receipt of payment (cash in advance or letter of credit), OLPC sends a
purchase order to manufacturer, this takes 1-2 weeks to process.  It
normally takes 12-16 weeks to manufacture the laptops.  The manufacturing
company has the capacity to produce 240,000 laptops per month for OLPC
although pre-existing OLPC orders would normally reduce this capacity.
(Few projects are capable to deal with more than 50,000 laptops arriving in
a single month.)  OLPC normally quotes 6 weeks for sea shipment of the
units.  Shipping the laptops by air takes less time from pick up to
delivery destination.  However, airfreight is more costly and is not
recommended.

The estimated transit time for ocean freight delivery is 1-6 weeks from the
time of XO availability at the manufacturer.  When planning for deployment
please allow 14-24 weeks from the time of payment issued to the date in
which you can expect your XO shipments at the designated port.  OLPC will
work with your deployment team to establish a proposed XO delivery
schedule.  Depending on the XO order quantity, delivery can be made in one
or multiple installments.  Issues to consider when developing your XO
delivery schedule should include: when laptops are required for teacher
training prior to the scheduled roll out; time required for local inventory
systems to process an XO delivery; final transit time for XO delivery to
their destination or distribution site; etc.  This information will assist
OLPC in working with core team to establish an orderly and efficient XO
delivery schedule.

[[file:images/10_xo_order_process.jpg]]

* Deployment Phase

The deployment phase includes all events that occur between laptop order
placement with the manufacturer and final distribution of XOs to schools
and children.  The lead time provides a term that can be allotted to
conclude recruitment of local team members and to arrange technical and
educational training with OLPC for core teams.  In addition, this time can
be used to fulfill infrastructure needs based on the results of the
feasibility study.

Warehousing facilities should be prepared for the arrival of laptops, as
should be the personnel in charge of inventory management and the
distribution process.

Heads of schools, along with administrators, need to be informed about the
goals and implications of the program from the early stages of a project.
Formal meetings with these parties and with other relevant members of the
school system or political figures should be organized toset up a timeline
for teacher training and other activities at the school level.

Once laptops arrive in a country, the steps to follow include setting up
logistics, training the core team with OLPC, setting up school
infrastructure, preparing schools and community, and rolling out laptops.

[[file:images/11_deploy_phases.jpg]]

** Setting Logistics

The logistics department of core team is responsible for managing the local
logistics process once the shipment is delivered to the port of
destination.  This logistics manager will be responsible for facilitating
the customs clearance process and local delivery of the shipment to its
final destination.  An efficient and speedy logistics process is not only
important to maintain the proposed deployment schedule, but also it is also
vital in order to avoid any charges or fees which may be applied to the
shipment if there is a delay in customs clearance or unloading at the port
of destination.

Once the laptops arrive in a country, clear customs and arrive at a sponsor
warehouse, there are three key tasks that need to be performed:

1. The laptops need to be individually inspected for damage suffered during
   transit, and any insurance claims need to be prepared

2. The laptops may need to be loaded with the latest version of the
   operating system and any local content, if there have been changes to
   the software since the units were shipped.  This procedure also serves
   as confirmation that the computers are in working order and are ready
   for students and teachers

3. The laptop serial numbers should be entered into the inventory
   management system along with the identification numbers of each student
   and teacher.  This procedure provides the basic information, which is
   then updated to reflect repair history, laptop transfers, or
   replacements.

*** Warehousing

When developing plans for local storage of XOs, it is important to consider
the security of storage facilities, impact of weather on stored XOs, and
possible insurance coverage required.

Final delivery of XOs to schools or distribution sites should be planned
and budgeted for.  If additional containers or trucking is needed to
transport the laptops to their final destination, it is important to budget
for such costs.  The OLPC Operations department can provide information on
packing dimensions and any other packing concerns.

Local warehousing enables stocks of laptops to be stored for configuration
while the logistics infrastructure is prepared for laptop roll out.
Strategic placement of regional warehouses can reduce the cost of logistics
and improve efficiency of laptop repair and replacement.

*** Laptop Distribution Plan

In the experience of OLPC, most sponsors can only distribute a maximum of
60,000 machines per month.  Machines are typically distributed by third
party companies, the military, or multi-lateral relief agencies such as the
World Food organization.  These organizations have extensive experience in
secure logistics.  In many countries, one thousand laptops is a high value
target for theft, and security should be a primary concern in selecting a
logistics company.  Any celebratory events should be timed to match the
arrival of computers at schools (which should coincide with the
availability of Internet).

OLPC’s experience shows that the best distribution plan is to start with
easiest areas first, unless there are political considerations.  Starting
in the easiest areas allows for any last minute changes in plan to be
identified and implemented.  Staff also learns faster when they can focus
on the simpler installations and do not have to install solar equipment or
satellite earth stations.

*** Spare Parts Management

Spare parts management is an often overlooked but key part of a successful
ongoing deployment.

Machines break as a result of use by kids; historically, repairs are higher
in areas with the poorest children.  Not surprisingly, these students lack
experience with consumer electronics and the proper care and treatment of
computers.

A project should plan for the receipt of a spare parts inventory within 6-9
months of the laptops reaching the children.  Up until that time, the 1% of
surplus units shipped with every order should be sufficient to handle
repairs.  OLPC logistics staff can provide advice on how to determine the
composition of the initial repair order; with time, the project should be
placing spare parts orders based on actual data.

*** Baseline study

Prior to starting a deployment it is advisable to have on record data that
describes the scenario where the project will be implemented.  The project
manager and the core team can work in conjunction with evaluation experts
or academic/research institutions to design an evaluation framework capable
of measuring the project’s impact in relation to the objectives expected to
achieve.  The design has to be aligned with measures of students learning,
therefore a careful analysis of indicators and tools need to be conducted.

The baseline information can serve as a valuable starting point to better
understand the community involved in the project, and can even lead to
formulation of objectives that stakeholders wish to achieve.  It also
grants the ability to measure the impact of a project, because it allows
researchers to statistically analyze and compare baseline data with data
collected throughout the years of a project’s implementation.

The goals and expected outcomes of the program should be the criteria for
selecting the type of data to collect as a baseline.  Institutional data
can measure changes in school attendance, school enrollment rates, and
drop-out rates.  Measures of social and behavioral impact can include
surveys or questionnaires related to attitudes, motivations, and opinions
from parents, students and community members about the project itself or
about students’ learning.  Students’ performance can be measured by
standardized local or national exams.  Traditional exams fail to evaluate
new skills that students develop as they incorporate technology into their
learning.  New dimensions of learning need to be assessed, such as
problem-solving skills, critical thinking, management of multiple sources
of information, the capacity for reflection, communication using multiple
means (visual, auditory, interactive, etc.), individual and team work
skills, and self-learning abilities; more complex dimensions include agency
(Carlson & Earls, 2001) and effectiveness of children and young people at
making significant changes to the environment in which they live (Kamo, N.
et al., 2008).  are.  Deployments are encouraged to explore innovative ways
of measuring student learning, and to attempt documenting and measuring new
learning dimensions.

** Setting Core Team

As we have explained in previous sections of this guide, the Core Team
refers to the local team in charge of implementing different domains of a
deployment.  In this section we will focus on the technical and learning
teams.  Their work is crucial for a successful implementation of a
deployment; the members need to be carefully recruited and supported
financially and proactively for the duration of the program.  At this point
of the deployment phase it is crucial to have established the Core Team.

The size of these teams will depend on the number of units for the
deployment.  Although technical and learning teams both focus on very
different areas, the ideal situation is that they constantly work as one
team, communicating plans, challenges, and updates on a very regular basis.
It is the responsibility of the project manager to facilitate the
relationship these teams will institute.  It is essential to provide
constant guidance to the core team by someone with the appropriate area of
expertise.  Having a manager for each team is deeply advisable.  These
managers should maintain constant communication with OLPC technical and
learning teams.

OLPC will facilitate a strategic workshop with the core team to:

1. Build capacity in managing the XO, its activities and its uses as a
   learning tool.

2. Build capacity in setting up infrastructure, connectivity and other
   technical requirements at school or community level.

3. Determine the support structure (for technical and pedagogical aspects)
   that will run from the core team to the school or learning center.

4. Determine and assist in the strategies for initial and ongoing teacher
   training, and in the development of content for schools and teachers.

5. Define strategies to integrate community and family members in the
   project.

The duration of the workshop can vary between several days to several
weeks.  This will depend on the characteristics of the project: deployment
size (amount of laptops, scaling and distribution plan), core team
(background and size), project location, project objectives, and
infrastructure status.  The duration will also depend on the agreements
reached during the planning phase with project manager and OLPC, and on the
specific contextual needs of the project.  The content and activities of
this initial workshop also vary depending on the needs and experience of
the participants.  However, the approach/methodology and some content are
common to all workshops for they revolve around the same principles we
advocate: learn by doing, by constructing, by collaborating, and by
reflecting.

We highly recommend the learning and technical managers of core team to
start discussing content, length and timing of this workshop with enough
time with OLPC through online webinars.  This will allow OLPC and
deployment to define the details of workshop and for the core team to
advance in necessary preparations prior to training.

*** OLPC training description

The goals of the OLPC learning workshop can include:

- To develop an understanding of the OLPC Learning Theory and Pedagogy.
- To provide a hands on experience of the Sugar Learning Platform.
- To enable core team to use the XO in effective learning strategies
  through construction, expression, and collaboration.
- To integrate 1:1 computing to curriculum and to informal learning
  environments.
- To evaluate learning within 1:1 computing environments.

Some technical contents of the workshop can be covered simultaneously with
learning team and technical team, while other advanced topics should be
covered separately with technical team.  The goals of the OLPC technical
workshop can include:

- Basic Software and Hardware troubleshooting
- Create and use USB Re-flash stick
- Connecting and registering to School Server
- Configuring Access Point.
- Installing and configuring School Server
- Defining a tech support strategy
- Defining a maintenance and repair strategy wide scale and school based

The following agenda is a sample of the topics usually covered during a 1
week workshop with Core Team:

[[file:images/12_training.jpg]]

The workshop is a hands-on experience that will not only enable
participants to become familiar with technical and pedagogical aspects of
the project, but also enable them to reflect on the strategies that should
be defined in the schools or learning centers.

OLPC offers follow up workshops that can be performed several months after
deployment is operating or once the core team has acquired the basic
experience, knowledge, and skills that benefit their deployment.  This
option of workshop can instead be performed during an initial training with
OLPC if participants already demonstrate an advanced level of skills.
Another option for follow up trainings consists on specialized workshops
that focus on a specific topic of interest to the core team and to
developed additional and specialized skills.  Finally, OLPC offers Regional
Workshops to address needs common to a specific region.  For this OLPC
selects a strategic location that will allow participants from multiple
deployments to attend.

The following are examples of advanced workshop for Core Team:

[[file:images/13_workshop_core_team.jpg]]

*** Content Development

Another recommended strategy for core teams to implement is the development
of content for communities and schools.  The following documents are
examples of such content: a) How-to Guides for different uses of the laptop
b) Ideas for projects that correspond to specific topics, which might be of
interest and/or relevance in the environment where students and teachers
live.  c) Lesson plans that show how to use different Sugar Activities when
teaching different parts of the national curriculum

We recommend the establishment of an initial library of projects that will
help teachers to integrate the computer into their teaching practice while
motivating them to create their own projects, focusing on the training
approach described in the previous section.  It may be that each teacher
uses the computer in their individual class, or that teachers from
different areas come together to design joint projects.  Either way, this
approach will help make explicit the concepts that the projects integrate
and promote, highlighting especially those concepts that one can
"manipulate" and understand by using the laptop, but which would be more
difficult, or nearly, impossible, with pen and paper.  

** Setting Local Infrastructure

Prior to the arrival of laptops, the technical members of core team should
evaluate, setup, test, and hold responsibility for the network and power
infrastructure at schools and/or other community centers.  OLPC can begin
supporting the core team before in-country training takes place, thru
online webinars or chats.  During the OLPC in-country visit the hands-on
training takes place, and the core team should be prepared for setting up
the local infrastructure.  OLPC will continue to support the technical
teams online after the in-country training has concluded.

*** Power

The electrical infrastructure of schools has to be evaluated according to
power demand generated by XO laptops, servers, and other devices.  If the
infrastructure is inadequate, it needs to be upgraded.

*** Connectivity

Although the OLPC ecosystem provides a self-configuring local-area wireless
network, connectivity to the Internet needs to set up separately.  OLPC can
assist in the planning and integration of a laptop network into a national
infrastructure.  OLPC staff has experience with VSAT, DSL, etc.  that it is
happy to share.  Many of the in-country teams have even more experience,
especially in regard to rural deployments.  Sharing best practices is in
everyone’s interests.  As with the laptop deployment, connectivity cannot
happen everywhere at once.  A phased effort carried out ahead of the laptop
deployment is ideal.  It should be noted that the wireless mesh network
provides local “Ethernet”-like connectivity without any additional
infrastructure.

*** School Server

Part of our deployment model is the utilization of school servers.  School
servers can be basic PCs that run Fedora, a variant of Linux.  School
servers are designed to provide gateways to the Internet, local content
repositories, XO back-up platforms, school management solutions, etc.
Large networks require servers designed for the size of the intended
deployment to be placed in local school.

Some key benefits school servers bring to a deployment are:

- Compatibility :: The OLPC Server is a software stack that can be
                   installed on any reasonable PC or server to complement
                   the XO and help school environments provide a safe,
                   well-managed and learning- oriented environment.  No
                   special hardware is required.

- Backup :: The XOs can all backup to an OLPC Server to ensure content
            isn't lost.  All XO Journals are backed up to school servers,
            and teachers can view the Journals to gain an understanding of
            how the XOs are used, as well as to track students’ progress
            and identify where they may need help.

- Digital Library :: A Digital Library makes it easy for students to
     publish works (with teacher moderation) to other students and possibly
     to other schools.  Teachers can easily add new resources to a Digital
     Library, which students can access at school (e.g.  there are over 1.6
     million free e-Books available)

- Management and Security :: Operators with high levels of technical skills
     can use school servers to manage network access, to lock laptops that
     get stolen or that aren’t returned to schools, and to provide local
     software repositories for laptop updates, etc.

- Proxy Server :: An OLPC Server can act as a network proxy.  This saves
                  Internet bandwidth, makes Internet access faster and
                  provides a mechanism for content filtering that can be
                  used to block inappropriate content.

- Continuous Development :: There are additional features coming to school
     servers, including Video conferencing, GPS and GIS functionality,
     Voice over IP, Instant messaging, and News services (blogging, forums,
     etc.) Servers are built on an Open Source platform, so they can be
     modified to suit particular needs of projects.

As important as all of the above-mentioned services are, the primary role
of school servers is to facilitate the operation of local area networks.
Without servers, XO laptops use multicast to communicate with each other,
which puts heavy loads on wireless networks; multicast can only connect up
to 20 laptops simultaneously School servers eliminate the need for much of
the multicast traffic

Recommended minimum specifications for a school server are as follows:

[[file:images/14_xs_specs.jpg]]

The amount of power required for school servers depends on the
specifications of machines used.  This needs to be taken into consideration
during site preparation.

** Preparing Schools and Community

When laptops are ready to be distributed, and assuming school
infrastructure is ready, it is time to prepare teachers and other community
members for this experience.  Teacher training and community awareness can
occur simultaneously but can also happen at different moments.  Variables
related to location, size, and readiness of each school or community need
to be considered when deciding the order in which to implement each event.

*** Teacher Training

Teacher training is an essential component of an OLPC project and it should
be an ongoing process.  Teachers should be the first members of the
educational community to receive information on and become involved in
initiatives that have direct effects on their own professional practices.
It is recommended to begin training teachers and provide them with XO
laptops during early stages of a project; this approach will raise their
level of trust and commitment to the initiative.

The most important aspect of teacher preparation is in regard to how
children learn.  Educators have long recognized that children learn best
when they are active, when they pursue their own interests, and when they
participate in cultures of knowledge and engagement.  With 1-to-1 access to
connected laptops, children actively engage in knowledge construction and
are not limited to passive reception of information.  Each child (and the
teachers themselves) can pursue learning in areas of strong personal
interest and the classroom is not limited to a pre-determined,
one-size-fits-all approach.

Teachers benefit as well.  Not only do they get to use the laptops at home
for their own learning, but the connected laptop becomes a conduit for
customized professional development.  This enables the teachers to gain
access to expertise and colleagues and allows them to pose and respond to
practical questions.  They can fully participate as producers of knowledge
and not just as consumers of materials produced by others.

The core team should develop different strategies to develop teacher’s
capacity:

1. Training workshops: where teachers learn to use the computer, and, at
   the same time, to incorporate it into their pedagogical practice.
   
2. Support mechanisms: Although the contents of the initiative constitute
   an important support mechanism to the practice of teaching, other
   mechanisms must be implemented, including in- class assistance, which
   can occur through agreements with universities, telephone help lines
   that can be set up with technical developers in the country, and Blogs
   or online forums where teachers can participate.
   
3. Teachers' clubs: work spaces where teachers can meet regularly to share
   successes, problems, and solutions.
   
4. Guides and Resources.

During the first teacher trainings teachers should learn basic uses of the
laptop and how to incorporate it into their pedagogical practice.  Training
should be guided by the vision and goal of the overall initiative.  We
recommend that the appropriate approach is “learning by doing” and that the
"doing" be focused on developing concrete projects within the classroom.
The core team should adapt the content and length for the initial training
based on the teachers’ skills.

It is recommended that the technical team performs training sessions along
with the educational team, to prepare teachers for basic technical
troubleshooting regarding software, hardware, and connectivity.  During
these first approaches with teachers, the core team can quickly identify
participants who demonstrate leadership and that can be key contacts to
support the project at the school level.  Depending on the scale of the
project, the core team can decide whether to train teachers directly or to
train Teacher-Trainers that will later reproduce the trainings to other
teachers.  Some projects decide to perform wide-scale trainings, an
approach organized for several schools to attend.  Schools can select key
members of their staff to participate in this training, with the intention
that these trainees become leaders and multiply the training at their own
school.  Another approach consists in assigning to each member of the core
team a specific school in which to perform training for the staff on site.
Whichever approach is decided, the core team needs to constantly monitor
the progress of each school and teacher.

The following agenda is a sample of the topics the core team can be covered
during an initial teacher training:

[[file:images/15_initial_teacher_training.jpg]]

Deploying laptops to every child in an entire region or country cannot be
managed by the core team alone.  It must be led by the core team, and
supported by regional teams.  The core team will need to set the guiding
principles of the program whilst the regional teams will be responsible for
executing the deployment in their regions according to these principles,
raising any concerns and coming up with viable alternatives where
necessary.  Various functions should be delegated to the regional teams for
management where these functions are naturally distributed across the
country or region.

*** Community Awareness

Prior to the arrival of laptops in a community, it is important to prepare
different groups of people that will be impacted with the project: parents,
teachers, school directors, families, and other active members of a
community.  The Minister of Education and Local Leaders should be involved
in communications about the program, its goals, characteristics, benefits
and derivative commitments.

Project coordinators must carefully plan awareness campaigns, by selecting
appropriate tools (print outs, posters, signs, etc.)  and communication
strategies (radio or television spots, meetings, etc.)  tailored to the
unique characteristics of each community and the scale of each project.
The timing of the campaigns should also be carefully thought through in
order to allow communities to prepare for formal program launches.  If
national campaigns are created to inform different audiences about
projects, such campaigns should be rolled out before laptop distribution or
after more formal community awareness actions are taken by core team.

The preparation phase plays a significant role in creating positive
expectations, attitudes, and involvement from all members.  When
communities understand the programs and their benefits, there are direct
impacts on learning and on how well the laptops are taken care of.  Both
nationally and locally, communities must know what one laptop per child
means.  The children are the best ambassadors, but parent and community
leader involvement is also influential.  Fostering awareness is very
important to the success of initiatives, both because it allows families
and other community members to be involved in the learning process of
children, and because it allows them to be active participants in the
creation of a new culture and new learning experiences within their
community.  Parent meetings can be held at schools or community centers and
should include, but not be limited, to the following topics:

- A description of responsibilities and roles involved in the different
  phases of the project.  Tasks to be defined, organized and carried out by
  different action groups.
- Establishment of standards for sharing laptops among siblings and to
  older children.
- Security of the laptops.  How and why to take care of the machines.
- Charging process.
- Internet access.
- Signing of agreement by parents

Other actors can be invited to the meetings so they can become part of the
initiative and to materialize agreements with various consultants and / or
volunteers of the project.

* Post Deployment Phase

There is a tremendous tendency to think that the work is done once the
laptops reach the children, but the laptop arrival really marks the
commencement of the most critical phase in a deployment and its positive
impact on the children.

Post deployment should focus on three key areas:

1. Continued Teacher Training and Support
2. Extracurricular Environments
3. Maintenance and Repairs

[[file:images/16_post_deploy.jpg]]

Community support is also a key success factor for a project.  Many
projects establish web portals for students, parents and teachers where
they can share information and see the progress of the students.  Many
projects also sponsor contests using the laptops which can be supported by
private sector sponsors.  An additional resource is the websites and
portals of other OLPC projects around the world where additional ideas for
community support are available.

Every project should have an ongoing public relations program to build
community support, develop pride in the project and its results and
possibly as a means to attract additional funding.  Many projects have
international public relations programs that attract academic interest in
the local project and prompt visits from multi-lateral institutions
interested in education and social projects.  Through its public relations
program Project Ceibal in Uruguay has garnered worldwide attention as one
of the leading educational laboratories in the world.

*Evaluation Studies*

Many projects benchmark their students and then periodically evaluate the
student progress every six or twelve months.  The UN uses six month
evaluations and large federal projects typically evaluate students every
year.  The advantage of benchmarking is that it provides objective,
transparent feedback on the success of the project and many multi-lateral
financial institutions require it.  OLPC leaves evaluation to the sponsor’s
decision, but OLPC can provide resources to implement an evaluation
program.

** Continued Teacher Training and Support

Teachers are a key part to any successful deployment.  As the teachers see
the increased student enthusiasm for learning as a result of the laptops,
the teachers naturally become more demanding for their own additional
training; help to integrate Sugar into the curriculum and hands on
assistance to develop lesson plans using the laptops.  Every project should
be designed to provide a minimum of once a month additional training to
every teacher in the project.  It should also be noted that the teacher
trainers will need periodic additional training from OLPC to reinforce the
OLPC pedagogy and expand their skill levels.

After initial teacher training has occurred, the local learning team must
provide other support mechanisms for teachers in order to aid the process
of integrating laptops to their daily teaching routine.  In-class
assistance, support for lesson plan development, are examples of strategies
to be offered on a school level.  Regular meetings with teachers can
provide direct feedback for educational team to plan for additional
learning workshops, which should be based on teachers and students needs.
These meetings also provide an opportunity for teachers to share their
experiences, learn different strategies, plan interdisciplinary projects,
and create strong school ties.

Content Development is another area that core team needs to constantly work
on.  It is important for teachers to have access to updated and innovative
resources.  Examples of this content can include: Lesson plans, Guides,
Case studies, assessment guides, online resources, and blogs.

** Extracurricular Environments

Extracurricular programs where children can use the XO laptops outside of
school settings are essential for meaningful learning experiences.  When
children are highly engaged in using the XO for activities they are
interested in, not for contents limited to school curriculum, we allow them
to fully explore their interests while appropriating new technological
skills.  It allows children to use self expression and creativity and
consequently become fluent with the technology, while increasing their
motivation, self empowerment, and impacting their lives in an extraordinary
way.

We recommend designing and organizing After-school/ Weekend programs, clubs
or camps with specific topics or activities at different schools or
communities.  These programs can involve teachers, students from different
levels, as well as local partners and can provide an excellent experience
where learners (teachers and students) create, collaborate and share
projects and ideas.

Integrating the family through activities that allow parents to work with
their children in specific projects related to their interests is another
enriching experience for students and families.  The objective is not only
to enable parents to share knowledge and experience with their children,
but also to understand the value of the computer and how it fits into the
learning process.  This is also important for the viability and
sustainability of the project.

** Maintenance and Repairs

The actual repair of the laptops may be handled in many ways.  There are
three popular methods:

1. The students repair their own laptops and parts are delivered to the
   schools bi-monthly based on an order.
   
2. The laptops are repaired by third party repair facilities located
   throughout the project area; this approach creates local jobs.
   
3. The laptops are repaired by technicians who visit the schools on a
   bi-monthly basis and make the repairs.

The choice of a repair procedure depends on the educational, political and
economic objectives of the project sponsor.  Another issue with respect to
repairs is who pays for the parts and labor involved in repairing the
laptop.  Some projects offer the first repair for free and subsequent
repairs are paid by the child’s parents.  Other projects offer all repairs
for free because the families lack the money to pay even a small cost.  The
policy with respect to repairs and payment should be explained at the
initial community event where the project is introduced to school
administrators and parents.  Laptops are shipped with an overstock of 1% of
the order.  These “extra” laptops should be used as replacements for
failures in the field.  Thus the “broken” laptops are a ready supply of
spare parts for other components, such as the display, the wifi antennae,
and the motherboard.

Most repairs, including replacement of the motherboard can be done in the
field with just a screwdriver.  The children can make these repairs
themselves and are encouraged to do so by OLPC.  Regional distribution of
spare parts is something to consider, as well as the authorization of
regional repair centers.

While commercial-grade support could be arranged, it is discouraged by OLPC
both because it tends to raise costs and it adds a level of external
dependency that is unnecessary.  If you feel the need to invest in support,
we encourage you to make that investment locally, the local community can
be trained by technical team to do this themselves.

* Summary of Recommended Tasks

** Planning Phase

- Define Budget for: Purchase, Infrastructure and Connectivity, Staff.
- Hire project manager and Core Team managers.
- Select Target community (schools, centers).
- Define XO specs.

** Deployment Phase

- Hire staff for Core Team.
- Arrange training for Core Team with OLPC.
- Develop Laptop Distribution Plan.
- Design and collect data for Baseline Study.
- Prepare Infrastructure and Connectivity (at schools and community level).
- Organize and Perform Teacher Training.
- Laptop Distribution.

** Post-Deployment Phase

- Design and perform Tech support strategy for Laptop Maintenance and
  Repairs.
- Design and supervise Learning Environments with the XO: Formal (in
  school, classroom),
- Non-Formal (extracurricular activities), Informal (home, family).
- Perform follow up teacher trainings.
- Design and apply Evaluation studies (for students learning and project
  implementation).

* Related websites

- Official OLPC website: http://laptop.org

- The OLPC Wiki: http://wiki.laptop.org

- http://wiki.laptop.org/go/Deployment_Guide : The wiki version of
  deployment guide might contain additional information to start up
  deployments, and provide a place for you to share your lessons learned.

- http://en.flossmanuals.net/Sugar : The Sugar Manual on floss manuals,
  searchable as a website or downloadable as a PDF.

- http://forum.laptop.org : Official OLPC community support forum.

- Frequently Asked Questions: http://wiki.laptop.org/go/Support_FAQ

- http://wiki.sugarlabs.org

The Sugar Labs Wiki, provider of the Sugar software environment and
activities that run on the XO laptops.
