= OLPC Deployment Guide 2011: Project Implementation =

__NOTOC__

An OLPC project has a direct impact on children and their learning
outcomes.  Other actors that are equally impacted by the project are the
school systems (especially teachers), families, and communities as a whole.
It is important to consider all of these actors when defining objectives
and implementation strategies.  Various domains must be included in such
strategies in order to ensure sustainability of the project.  The pyramid
below illustrates the hierarchy of these domains.

The base of the pyramid is infrastructure, which refers to providing access
not only to the laptop, but also to the electrical grid (or other
alternative power source), to the Internet, and to school servers.  Without
this base, movement towards the top of the pyramid will be very difficult
and will limit the outcomes expected to be achieved with the project.  The
top tier refers to two types of assessments.

Assessments of the first type measure the project’s impact, including
student learning and other objectives, such as social effect and school
improvement.  Assessments of the second type identify areas for improvement
of project implementation.  The elements of the pyramid are meant to be in
a constant cycle where the top always gives feedback to the rest of the
domains.

[[Image:2_project_implementation.jpg]]

== Core Team ==

For successful implementation of the OLPC project, we highly recommended
deployments to recruit and build a local team with skills in: managerial,
logistics, technical, and educational fields.  The term we use to refer to
this team is the “Core Team”.  This team will serve as the interface
between the project and OLPC.

We advise hiring a project manager with experience in: project and budget
planning, external relations and communication.  This manager is expected
to plan and coordinate operations, as well as to supervise the different
departments involved in the project.  In addition to managerial skills it
is preferable that the potential manager has a background in technical
and/or educational fields.  The project manager should take on the
selection of the core team members he will manage.  The following
organizational chart for the Core Team is recommended:

[[Image:3_core_team.jpg]]

For large deployments (>50,000 units) we consider a vital requirement to
comply with all members mentioned in the organizational chart.  Local
leaders should be hired as educational/learning and technical managers to
coordinate matters related to their area of expertise.  A logistics
coordinator should be in charge of laptop storage, inventory and spare
parts management.  For smaller deployments (<2,500 units) the logistics
manager’s tasks can be performed by the technical and/or the project
manager.

The following chart provides additional information on the responsibilities
and required skills of the Core Team members:

[[Image:4_core_team_skills_1.jpg]]

[[Image:5_core_team_skills_2.jpg]]

[[Image:6_core_team_skills_3.jpg]]


