#+TITLE: Deployment Phase
#+AUTHOR: OLPC Foundation (c) 2011 One Laptop Per Child Association, Inc.
#+DATE: 2011-09-12
#+OPTIONS: toc:nil

The deployment phase includes all events that occur between laptop order
placement with the manufacturer and final distribution of XOs to schools
and children.  The lead time provides a term that can be allotted to
conclude recruitment of local team members and to arrange technical and
educational training with OLPC for core teams.  In addition, this time can
be used to fulfill infrastructure needs based on the results of the
feasibility study.

Warehousing facilities should be prepared for the arrival of laptops, as
should be the personnel in charge of inventory management and the
distribution process.

Heads of schools, along with administrators, need to be informed about the
goals and implications of the program from the early stages of a project.
Formal meetings with these parties and with other relevant members of the
school system or political figures should be organized toset up a timeline
for teacher training and other activities at the school level.

Once laptops arrive in a country, the steps to follow include setting up
logistics, training the core team with OLPC, setting up school
infrastructure, preparing schools and community, and rolling out laptops.

[[file:~/install/git/OLPC-Deployment--community--guide/images/11_deploy_phases.jpg]]

* Setting Logistics

The logistics department of core team is responsible for managing the local
logistics process once the shipment is delivered to the port of
destination.  This logistics manager will be responsible for facilitating
the customs clearance process and local delivery of the shipment to its
final destination.  An efficient and speedy logistics process is not only
important to maintain the proposed deployment schedule, but also it is also
vital in order to avoid any charges or fees which may be applied to the
shipment if there is a delay in customs clearance or unloading at the port
of destination.

Once the laptops arrive in a country, clear customs and arrive at a sponsor
warehouse, there are three key tasks that need to be performed:

1. The laptops need to be individually inspected for damage suffered during
   transit, and any insurance claims need to be prepared

2. The laptops may need to be loaded with the latest version of the
   operating system and any local content, if there have been changes to
   the software since the units were shipped.  This procedure also serves
   as confirmation that the computers are in working order and are ready
   for students and teachers

3. The laptop serial numbers should be entered into the inventory
   management system along with the identification numbers of each student
   and teacher.  This procedure provides the basic information, which is
   then updated to reflect repair history, laptop transfers, or
   replacements.

** Warehousing

When developing plans for local storage of XOs, it is important to consider
the security of storage facilities, impact of weather on stored XOs, and
possible insurance coverage required.

Final delivery of XOs to schools or distribution sites should be planned
and budgeted for.  If additional containers or trucking is needed to
transport the laptops to their final destination, it is important to budget
for such costs.  The OLPC Operations department can provide information on
packing dimensions and any other packing concerns.

Local warehousing enables stocks of laptops to be stored for configuration
while the logistics infrastructure is prepared for laptop roll out.
Strategic placement of regional warehouses can reduce the cost of logistics
and improve efficiency of laptop repair and replacement.

** Laptop Distribution Plan

In the experience of OLPC, most sponsors can only distribute a maximum of
60,000 machines per month.  Machines are typically distributed by third
party companies, the military, or multi-lateral relief agencies such as the
World Food organization.  These organizations have extensive experience in
secure logistics.  In many countries, one thousand laptops is a high value
target for theft, and security should be a primary concern in selecting a
logistics company.  Any celebratory events should be timed to match the
arrival of computers at schools (which should coincide with the
availability of Internet).

OLPC’s experience shows that the best distribution plan is to start with
easiest areas first, unless there are political considerations.  Starting
in the easiest areas allows for any last minute changes in plan to be
identified and implemented.  Staff also learns faster when they can focus
on the simpler installations and do not have to install solar equipment or
satellite earth stations.

** Spare Parts Management

Spare parts management is an often overlooked but key part of a successful
ongoing deployment.

Machines break as a result of use by kids; historically, repairs are higher
in areas with the poorest children.  Not surprisingly, these students lack
experience with consumer electronics and the proper care and treatment of
computers.

A project should plan for the receipt of a spare parts inventory within 6-9
months of the laptops reaching the children.  Up until that time, the 1% of
surplus units shipped with every order should be sufficient to handle
repairs.  OLPC logistics staff can provide advice on how to determine the
composition of the initial repair order; with time, the project should be
placing spare parts orders based on actual data.

** Baseline study

Prior to starting a deployment it is advisable to have on record data that
describes the scenario where the project will be implemented.  The project
manager and the core team can work in conjunction with evaluation experts
or academic/research institutions to design an evaluation framework capable
of measuring the project’s impact in relation to the objectives expected to
achieve.  The design has to be aligned with measures of students learning,
therefore a careful analysis of indicators and tools need to be conducted.

The baseline information can serve as a valuable starting point to better
understand the community involved in the project, and can even lead to
formulation of objectives that stakeholders wish to achieve.  It also
grants the ability to measure the impact of a project, because it allows
researchers to statistically analyze and compare baseline data with data
collected throughout the years of a project’s implementation.

The goals and expected outcomes of the program should be the criteria for
selecting the type of data to collect as a baseline.  Institutional data
can measure changes in school attendance, school enrollment rates, and
drop-out rates.  Measures of social and behavioral impact can include
surveys or questionnaires related to attitudes, motivations, and opinions
from parents, students and community members about the project itself or
about students’ learning.  Students’ performance can be measured by
standardized local or national exams.  Traditional exams fail to evaluate
new skills that students develop as they incorporate technology into their
learning.  New dimensions of learning need to be assessed, such as
problem-solving skills, critical thinking, management of multiple sources
of information, the capacity for reflection, communication using multiple
means (visual, auditory, interactive, etc.), individual and team work
skills, and self-learning abilities; more complex dimensions include agency
(Carlson & Earls, 2001) and effectiveness of children and young people at
making significant changes to the environment in which they live (Kamo, N.
et al., 2008).  are.  Deployments are encouraged to explore innovative ways
of measuring student learning, and to attempt documenting and measuring new
learning dimensions.

[[file:~/install/git/OLPC-Deployment--community--guide/images/12_training.jpg]]

* Setting Core Team

As we have explained in previous sections of this guide, the Core Team
refers to the local team in charge of implementing different domains of a
deployment.  In this section we will focus on the technical and learning
teams.  Their work is crucial for a successful implementation of a
deployment; the members need to be carefully recruited and supported
financially and proactively for the duration of the program.  At this point
of the deployment phase it is crucial to have established the Core Team.

The size of these teams will depend on the number of units for the
deployment.  Although technical and learning teams both focus on very
different areas, the ideal situation is that they constantly work as one
team, communicating plans, challenges, and updates on a very regular basis.
It is the responsibility of the project manager to facilitate the
relationship these teams will institute.  It is essential to provide
constant guidance to the core team by someone with the appropriate area of
expertise.  Having a manager for each team is deeply advisable.  These
managers should maintain constant communication with OLPC technical and
learning teams.

OLPC will facilitate a strategic workshop with the core team to:

1. Build capacity in managing the XO, its activities and its uses as a
   learning tool.

2. Build capacity in setting up infrastructure, connectivity and other
   technical requirements at school or community level.

3. Determine the support structure (for technical and pedagogical aspects)
   that will run from the core team to the school or learning center.

4. Determine and assist in the strategies for initial and ongoing teacher
   training, and in the development of content for schools and teachers.

5. Define strategies to integrate community and family members in the
   project.

The duration of the workshop can vary between several days to several
weeks.  This will depend on the characteristics of the project: deployment
size (amount of laptops, scaling and distribution plan), core team
(background and size), project location, project objectives, and
infrastructure status.  The duration will also depend on the agreements
reached during the planning phase with project manager and OLPC, and on the
specific contextual needs of the project.  The content and activities of
this initial workshop also vary depending on the needs and experience of
the participants.  However, the approach/methodology and some content are
common to all workshops for they revolve around the same principles we
advocate: learn by doing, by constructing, by collaborating, and by
reflecting.

We highly recommend the learning and technical managers of core team to
start discussing content, length and timing of this workshop with enough
time with OLPC through online webinars.  This will allow OLPC and
deployment to define the details of workshop and for the core team to
advance in necessary preparations prior to training.

** OLPC training description

The goals of the OLPC learning workshop can include:

- To develop an understanding of the OLPC Learning Theory and Pedagogy.
- To provide a hands on experience of the Sugar Learning Platform.
- To enable core team to use the XO in effective learning strategies
  through construction, expression, and collaboration.
- To integrate 1:1 computing to curriculum and to informal learning
  environments.
- To evaluate learning within 1:1 computing environments.

Some technical contents of the workshop can be covered simultaneously with
learning team and technical team, while other advanced topics should be
covered separately with technical team.  The goals of the OLPC technical
workshop can include:

- Basic Software and Hardware troubleshooting
- Create and use USB Re-flash stick
- Connecting and registering to School Server
- Configuring Access Point.
- Installing and configuring School Server
- Defining a tech support strategy
- Defining a maintenance and repair strategy wide scale and school based

The following agenda is a sample of the topics usually covered during a 1
week workshop with Core Team:


The workshop is a hands-on experience that will not only enable
participants to become familiar with technical and pedagogical aspects of
the project, but also enable them to reflect on the strategies that should
be defined in the schools or learning centers.

OLPC offers follow up workshops that can be performed several months after
deployment is operating or once the core team has acquired the basic
experience, knowledge, and skills that benefit their deployment.  This
option of workshop can instead be performed during an initial training with
OLPC if participants already demonstrate an advanced level of skills.
Another option for follow up trainings consists on specialized workshops
that focus on a specific topic of interest to the core team and to
developed additional and specialized skills.  Finally, OLPC offers Regional
Workshops to address needs common to a specific region.  For this OLPC
selects a strategic location that will allow participants from multiple
deployments to attend.

The following are examples of advanced workshop for Core Team:

[[file:~/install/git/OLPC-Deployment--community--guide/images/13_workshop_core_team.jpg]]

** Content Development

Another recommended strategy for core teams to implement is the development
of content for communities and schools.  The following documents are
examples of such content: a) How-to Guides for different uses of the laptop
b) Ideas for projects that correspond to specific topics, which might be of
interest and/or relevance in the environment where students and teachers
live.  c) Lesson plans that show how to use different Sugar Activities when
teaching different parts of the national curriculum

We recommend the establishment of an initial library of projects that will
help teachers to integrate the computer into their teaching practice while
motivating them to create their own projects, focusing on the training
approach described in the previous section.  It may be that each teacher
uses the computer in their individual class, or that teachers from
different areas come together to design joint projects.  Either way, this
approach will help make explicit the concepts that the projects integrate
and promote, highlighting especially those concepts that one can
"manipulate" and understand by using the laptop, but which would be more
difficult, or nearly, impossible, with pen and paper.  

* Preparing Schools and Community

When laptops are ready to be distributed, and assuming school
infrastructure is ready, it is time to prepare teachers and other community
members for this experience.  Teacher training and community awareness can
occur simultaneously but can also happen at different moments.  Variables
related to location, size, and readiness of each school or community need
to be considered when deciding the order in which to implement each event.

** Teacher Training

Teacher training is an essential component of an OLPC project and it should
be an ongoing process.  Teachers should be the first members of the
educational community to receive information on and become involved in
initiatives that have direct effects on their own professional practices.
It is recommended to begin training teachers and provide them with XO
laptops during early stages of a project; this approach will raise their
level of trust and commitment to the initiative.

The most important aspect of teacher preparation is in regard to how
children learn.  Educators have long recognized that children learn best
when they are active, when they pursue their own interests, and when they
participate in cultures of knowledge and engagement.  With 1-to-1 access to
connected laptops, children actively engage in knowledge construction and
are not limited to passive reception of information.  Each child (and the
teachers themselves) can pursue learning in areas of strong personal
interest and the classroom is not limited to a pre-determined,
one-size-fits-all approach.

Teachers benefit as well.  Not only do they get to use the laptops at home
for their own learning, but the connected laptop becomes a conduit for
customized professional development.  This enables the teachers to gain
access to expertise and colleagues and allows them to pose and respond to
practical questions.  They can fully participate as producers of knowledge
and not just as consumers of materials produced by others.

The core team should develop different strategies to develop teacher’s
capacity:

1. Training workshops: where teachers learn to use the computer, and, at
   the same time, to incorporate it into their pedagogical practice.
   
2. Support mechanisms: Although the contents of the initiative constitute
   an important support mechanism to the practice of teaching, other
   mechanisms must be implemented, including in- class assistance, which
   can occur through agreements with universities, telephone help lines
   that can be set up with technical developers in the country, and Blogs
   or online forums where teachers can participate.
   
3. Teachers' clubs: work spaces where teachers can meet regularly to share
   successes, problems, and solutions.
   
4. Guides and Resources.

During the first teacher trainings teachers should learn basic uses of the
laptop and how to incorporate it into their pedagogical practice.  Training
should be guided by the vision and goal of the overall initiative.  We
recommend that the appropriate approach is “learning by doing” and that the
"doing" be focused on developing concrete projects within the classroom.
The core team should adapt the content and length for the initial training
based on the teachers’ skills.

It is recommended that the technical team performs training sessions along
with the educational team, to prepare teachers for basic technical
troubleshooting regarding software, hardware, and connectivity.  During
these first approaches with teachers, the core team can quickly identify
participants who demonstrate leadership and that can be key contacts to
support the project at the school level.  Depending on the scale of the
project, the core team can decide whether to train teachers directly or to
train Teacher-Trainers that will later reproduce the trainings to other
teachers.  Some projects decide to perform wide-scale trainings, an
approach organized for several schools to attend.  Schools can select key
members of their staff to participate in this training, with the intention
that these trainees become leaders and multiply the training at their own
school.  Another approach consists in assigning to each member of the core
team a specific school in which to perform training for the staff on site.
Whichever approach is decided, the core team needs to constantly monitor
the progress of each school and teacher.

The following agenda is a sample of the topics the core team can be covered
during an initial teacher training:

[[file:~/install/git/OLPC-Deployment--community--guide/images/14_xs_specs.jpg]]

Deploying laptops to every child in an entire region or country cannot be
managed by the core team alone.  It must be led by the core team, and
supported by regional teams.  The core team will need to set the guiding
principles of the program whilst the regional teams will be responsible for
executing the deployment in their regions according to these principles,
raising any concerns and coming up with viable alternatives where
necessary.  Various functions should be delegated to the regional teams for
management where these functions are naturally distributed across the
country or region.

** Community Awareness

Prior to the arrival of laptops in a community, it is important to prepare
different groups of people that will be impacted with the project: parents,
teachers, school directors, families, and other active members of a
community.  The Minister of Education and Local Leaders should be involved
in communications about the program, its goals, characteristics, benefits
and derivative commitments.

Project coordinators must carefully plan awareness campaigns, by selecting
appropriate tools (print outs, posters, signs, etc.)  and communication
strategies (radio or television spots, meetings, etc.)  tailored to the
unique characteristics of each community and the scale of each project.
The timing of the campaigns should also be carefully thought through in
order to allow communities to prepare for formal program launches.  If
national campaigns are created to inform different audiences about
projects, such campaigns should be rolled out before laptop distribution or
after more formal community awareness actions are taken by core team.

The preparation phase plays a significant role in creating positive
expectations, attitudes, and involvement from all members.  When
communities understand the programs and their benefits, there are direct
impacts on learning and on how well the laptops are taken care of.  Both
nationally and locally, communities must know what one laptop per child
means.  The children are the best ambassadors, but parent and community
leader involvement is also influential.  Fostering awareness is very
important to the success of initiatives, both because it allows families
and other community members to be involved in the learning process of
children, and because it allows them to be active participants in the
creation of a new culture and new learning experiences within their
community.  Parent meetings can be held at schools or community centers and
should include, but not be limited, to the following topics:

- A description of responsibilities and roles involved in the different
  phases of the project.  Tasks to be defined, organized and carried out by
  different action groups.
- Establishment of standards for sharing laptops among siblings and to
  older children.
- Security of the laptops.  How and why to take care of the machines.
- Charging process.
- Internet access.
- Signing of agreement by parents

Other actors can be invited to the meetings so they can become part of the
initiative and to materialize agreements with various consultants and / or
volunteers of the project.
* Setting Local Infrastructure

Prior to the arrival of laptops, the technical members of core team should
evaluate, setup, test, and hold responsibility for the network and power
infrastructure at schools and/or other community centers.  OLPC can begin
supporting the core team before in-country training takes place, thru
online webinars or chats.  During the OLPC in-country visit the hands-on
training takes place, and the core team should be prepared for setting up
the local infrastructure.  OLPC will continue to support the technical
teams online after the in-country training has concluded.

** Power

The electrical infrastructure of schools has to be evaluated according to
power demand generated by XO laptops, servers, and other devices.  If the
infrastructure is inadequate, it needs to be upgraded.

** Connectivity

Although the OLPC ecosystem provides a self-configuring local-area wireless
network, connectivity to the Internet needs to set up separately.  OLPC can
assist in the planning and integration of a laptop network into a national
infrastructure.  OLPC staff has experience with VSAT, DSL, etc.  that it is
happy to share.  Many of the in-country teams have even more experience,
especially in regard to rural deployments.  Sharing best practices is in
everyone’s interests.  As with the laptop deployment, connectivity cannot
happen everywhere at once.  A phased effort carried out ahead of the laptop
deployment is ideal.  It should be noted that the wireless mesh network
provides local “Ethernet”-like connectivity without any additional
infrastructure.

** School Server

Part of our deployment model is the utilization of school servers.  School
servers can be basic PCs that run Fedora, a variant of Linux.  School
servers are designed to provide gateways to the Internet, local content
repositories, XO back-up platforms, school management solutions, etc.
Large networks require servers designed for the size of the intended
deployment to be placed in local school.

Some key benefits school servers bring to a deployment are:

- Compatibility :: The OLPC Server is a software stack that can be
                   installed on any reasonable PC or server to complement
                   the XO and help school environments provide a safe,
                   well-managed and learning- oriented environment.  No
                   special hardware is required.

- Backup :: The XOs can all backup to an OLPC Server to ensure content
            isn't lost.  All XO Journals are backed up to school servers,
            and teachers can view the Journals to gain an understanding of
            how the XOs are used, as well as to track students’ progress
            and identify where they may need help.

- Digital Library :: A Digital Library makes it easy for students to
     publish works (with teacher moderation) to other students and possibly
     to other schools.  Teachers can easily add new resources to a Digital
     Library, which students can access at school (e.g.  there are over 1.6
     million free e-Books available)

- Management and Security :: Operators with high levels of technical skills
     can use school servers to manage network access, to lock laptops that
     get stolen or that aren’t returned to schools, and to provide local
     software repositories for laptop updates, etc.

- Proxy Server :: An OLPC Server can act as a network proxy.  This saves
                  Internet bandwidth, makes Internet access faster and
                  provides a mechanism for content filtering that can be
                  used to block inappropriate content.

- Continuous Development :: There are additional features coming to school
     servers, including Video conferencing, GPS and GIS functionality,
     Voice over IP, Instant messaging, and News services (blogging, forums,
     etc.) Servers are built on an Open Source platform, so they can be
     modified to suit particular needs of projects.

As important as all of the above-mentioned services are, the primary role
of school servers is to facilitate the operation of local area networks.
Without servers, XO laptops use multicast to communicate with each other,
which puts heavy loads on wireless networks; multicast can only connect up
to 20 laptops simultaneously School servers eliminate the need for much of
the multicast traffic

Recommended minimum specifications for a school server are as follows:

[[file:~/install/git/OLPC-Deployment--community--guide/images/15_initial_teacher_training.jpg]]

The amount of power required for school servers depends on the
specifications of machines used.  This needs to be taken into consideration
during site preparation.

