#+TITLE: Purchase Agreements and Ordering Process
#+AUTHOR: OLPC Foundation (c) 2011 One Laptop Per Child Association, Inc.
#+DATE: 2011-09-12
#+OPTIONS: toc:nil

[[file:index.org][Table of contents]] -- [[file:theindex.org][Index]]

This section describes the customary process prior to ordering laptops
which includes certain decisions about the technical features of the XO and
the related contractual agreements.

* Selecting your XO

#+index: XO

The XO can be manufactured in various forms to best fit the local context
of the deployment.

** Keyboards

#+index: XO!Keyboards

XO laptops can be manufactured with a variety of language for keyboards.
In order for an XO keyboard to be available, a high-resolution image of the
layout must be accessible and existing XO software must support the
keyboard image.OLPC software releases are designed to support the
International XO keyboard option.

** AC Adapters

#+index: XO!AC Adapters

There are two types of adaptors available brick or wall mount.  The XO AC
adapter has an input of 100- 240 volts and is available in 3 options:

- 2 flat prong (US)
- 2 round prong (EU)
- 3 flat prong (UK)

** Memory

#+index: XO!AC Memory

The XO uses solid state memory instead of a hard disk.  This is primarily
to improve its robustness but also to improve performance and reduce power
consumption.  The default memory type is 1GB of RAM and 4GB of Flash.
Depending on the budget and usage requirements, selection of faster or
bigger solid state memory for the XO can improve performance and storage
capacity.

** Content and Custom Image

#+index: XO!Content
#+index: XO!Custom Image

OLPC has developed a mechanism whereby the collection of “activities” and
content “bundles” loaded onto the laptop can be readily pre-configured.  It
is also reasonably easy to reconfigure the XO in the field.  It is the
responsibility of the core team to determine which activities beyond the
default set distributed by OLPC should be included on the laptop.
Everything provided on the XO, including texts, dictionaries,
documentation, etc., can be localized.  Electronic books—in formats such as
PDF, DOC, HTML—and other media can be pre-loaded onto the laptop as a
content bundle.  Please ask OLPC for suggestions as to potentially useful
materials and pre-loaded content preparation.

In addition, a deployment may choose to deploy computers with a custom
image.  A custom image is a selection of XO activities designed by a local
deployment team.  The option to load a custom image onto the XO at the time
of manufacturing depends on the level of skill and commitment from the
project’s technical and learning advisors.  There is also a minimum order
requirement for loading a custom image at the time of manufacturing.  A
custom image requires testing and maintenance.  OLPC provides projects with
the guidelines for this process; however, no technical support can be
provided for custom images as they are designed by core teams.  Sponsors
interested in XO custom images should consult with OLPC technical
personnel, who will assess the project’s suitability for this option.  If a
decision is reached to load a custom image at the time of manufacturing,
the final image must be presented to OLCP no later than 4 weeks prior to
the scheduled XO production.

Once the XO is physically customized for a particular country, it is ready
to be used.  However, due to the different curricula and language
variations of each country, it may be useful to select specific activities
to install on the XO as part of a “custom build” and also to review the
content available in the local language to determine if any work is
necessary to create translations or provide new content that is more
culturally relevant.  This could include the following:

#+index: XO!Curriculum
#+index: Sugar!Activities
#+index: Maps
#+index: E-books
#+index: Language
#+index: Translation

- Pre-loading specific Sugar Activities to support specific curricula
  needs;

- Pre-loading specific activity content such as e-books;

- Browser bookmarks to country specific education websites;

- Maps;

- Providing language translations for Sugar and Activities loaded on the
  laptop (so that system messages, menus and buttons are in the local
  language);

- Providing language translations for Activity content (so that content
  within activities is in the local language, e.g.  e-books or place names
  on maps);

- Developing customized Sugar Activities to meet specific curriculum needs;
  and Developing custom content to meet specific curriculum or cultural
  needs.

The custom XO image option requires a certain level of skill and commitment
from the technical and learning deployment advisors.  OLPC will help with
the bundling process, but the responsibility for testing the bundle rests
with the in-country deployment teams.

* Purchase Agreement

#+index: Purchase
#+index: Delivery

OLPC recognizes a binding commitment from a sponsor to a project upon
receipt of a signed purchase agreement and a letter of credit in favor of
OLPC for 100% of the value of the laptops.  OLPC also accepts advance telex
transfers of cash in lieu of letters of credit.

The purchase agreement includes five major sections:

1. Detailed specifications of the laptop including the configuration of RAM
   and flash memory;

2. Number of laptops ordered and the price per laptop CIF;

3. Delivery schedule ;

4. Warranty terms and conditions; and

5. Standard legal sections such as governing law and dispute resolution.

For purchases of large quantities of XOs, OLPC will work on a contractual
agreement detailing the terms and conditions of the XO orders.  OLPC has a
contract template that can be modified in accordance with the deployment
requirements.  Issues addressed in the OLPC contract include payment terms,
warranty, letter of credit guidelines, and other topics pertaining to the
XO procurement process.  OLPC’s finance, supply chain, and logistics
personnel work closely to ensure the deadlines and conditions set forth in
the contractual agreement are adhered to.

** Payment & Inco terms

#+index: XO!Payment
#+index: Incoterm

The most common payment option for large-scale XO orders is 20% down
payment and 80% payable by transferable letter of credit.  The OLPC
template for issuing transferable letters of credit can be found in the
OLPC contract.  OLPC Finance personnel are committed to ensuring any
finance issues pertaining to an OLPC purchase are addressed quickly and
efficiently.  The Incoterm used for large quantity XO orders is CIF (cost,
insurance, and freight Incoterms 2010).  The CIF term means that the seller
(OLPC) is responsible for the shipment and insurance costs from the country
of origin to the port of destination.

The buyer of the shipment is responsible for all costs associated with the
shipment once the goods are delivered to the port of destination.  These
costs include customs entry and clearance, entry duties and taxes,
demurrage charges, landing charges at the importer's port, the unloading
onto trucks at the importer's port and the delivery to the final
destination.

** Warranty

#+index: Warranty

All XO orders are shipped with an additional 1% of units in lieu of a
conventional warranty program.  These units are shipped at no extra cost.
In addition to the supplemental units, OLPC provides a limited warranty in
the event of an epidemic failure.  Details on this warranty can be found in
the OLPC contract.

** Local Duties and Taxes

#+index: Taxes
#+index: Duties

The local duties and taxes associated with a shipment of XO laptops vary
depending on the rules and regulations of the local customs authority.
Import duties for laptops can be very high, and may reach20% of the
commercial value in some cases.  In order to avoid such taxes, OLPC
recommends that local teams research local processes for tax exemption and
seek such exemption whenever possible.

Receiving tax exemption on imported laptops for educational purposes may
require authorization from a number of local authorities; gaining such
authorization may take considerable planning.  Local customs authorities
should be consulted regarding the process and time frame of receiving a
recognized exemption.  OLPC is able to provide any documentation necessary
to process an exemption request with local authorities.

** Spare Parts

#+index: XO!Spare parts

XO spare parts can be purchased in conjunction with an initial XO order or
at a later date.  OLPC can assist the logistics department of team in
purchasing spare parts from the XO manufacturer.  Spare parts are available
in a range of minimum order quantities.  If spare parts are purchased with
an initial order, OLPC can recommend specific parts and quantities.

OLPC logistics staff based in Miami, FL track each order from receipt of
the letter of credit through the delivery of computers to the requested
port.  Weekly status reports can be provided to a project sponsor.  It is
the responsibility of local sponsors to clear units through local customs.
Local sponsors are also solely responsible for any and all duties, taxes,
fees and other costs related to freight forwarding services .
Additionally,local sponsors are responsible for all costs of transporting
computers from the dock to the warehouse.

* XO Order Process and Lead Time

#+index: XO!Order process
#+index: XO!Lead time

In order to minimize the end cost, OLPC manufactures laptops to order and
does not maintain an inventory of laptops.  Formalizing the commitment to
purchase XO laptops assists OLPC in working with core team to establish a
deployment timeline that will lead to an efficient XO deployment
experience.

Upon receipt of payment (cash in advance or letter of credit), OLPC sends a
purchase order to manufacturer, this takes 1-2 weeks to process.  It
normally takes 12-16 weeks to manufacture the laptops.  The manufacturing
company has the capacity to produce 240,000 laptops per month for OLPC
although pre-existing OLPC orders would normally reduce this capacity.
(Few projects are capable to deal with more than 50,000 laptops arriving in
a single month.)  OLPC normally quotes 6 weeks for sea shipment of the
units.  Shipping the laptops by air takes less time from pick up to
delivery destination.  However, airfreight is more costly and is not
recommended.

The estimated transit time for ocean freight delivery is 1-6 weeks from the
time of XO availability at the manufacturer.  When planning for deployment
please allow 14-24 weeks from the time of payment issued to the date in
which you can expect your XO shipments at the designated port.  OLPC will
work with your deployment team to establish a proposed XO delivery
schedule.  Depending on the XO order quantity, delivery can be made in one
or multiple installments.  Issues to consider when developing your XO
delivery schedule should include: when laptops are required for teacher
training prior to the scheduled roll out; time required for local inventory
systems to process an XO delivery; final transit time for XO delivery to
their destination or distribution site; etc.  This information will assist
OLPC in working with core team to establish an orderly and efficient XO
delivery schedule.

[[file:~/install/git/OLPC-Deployment--community--guide/images/10_xo_order_process.jpg]]

[[file:index.org][Table of contents]] -- [[file:theindex.org][Index]]
